New CAIP - Web of Trust Primitives (Split of former: Community-powered trust assessment in software components) (#261)
ChainAgnostic/CAIPs: CAIPs/caip-261.md

A validity limitation can be introduced with the fields `validFrom` and `validUntil`.
```json
"@context": ["https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"],
"type": ["VerifiableCredential", "PeerTrustCredential"],
"issuanceDate": "2024-02-15T07:05:56.273Z",
"issuer": "did:pkh:eip155:1:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
"validFrom": "2024-01-01T19:23:24Z",
"validUntil": "2025-01-01T19:23:24Z",
```

### Trust Management
Initially, issued trust assertions should be properly persisted to ensure their availability according to the use-case.
Subsequently, as trust between peers evolves over time, this proposal outlines a method for managing the entire lifecycle of these assertions, encompassing their creation, update, and eventual revocation.

#### Trust Peristance
Trust Assertions issued by peers are composing a verifiable trust graph that can be consumed for trustless reputation-based use cases. To fulfill its purpose, these assertions SHOULD be persisted using mechanisms that meet these properties relative to the use-case:
- Security,
- Data integrity,
- Data ownership,
- Interoperabiltiy,
- Scalability,
- Censorship resistance,
- Sustainability.

#### Trust Update

> When an issuer needs to update a trust assertion, they simply generate a new assertion containing the revised information. 

Reviewer: is there any tombstoning system for assertions that have been superceded? could/should there be, at least optionally? people unfamiliar with IPFS may not realize they have manage their own garbage collection in a system where superceding/updating records are submitted often...

> This new assertion, when issued, will supersede any previous assertions of the same type, issued by the same entity, and pertaining to the same subject. 

Reviewer: is there any tombstoning system for assertions that have been superceded? could/should there be, at least optionally? people unfamiliar with IPFS may not realize they have to do their own garbage collecting or dropping of records that have been replaced but haven't expired yet...

Reviewer: oh wait all comments won't make sense here until the commit i'm working on get merged-- sorry, mixing substantial and editorial in one mega commit again 🤦

### Trust Assertions Verification
The standard presumes that both the `issuer` property will be dereferenced and the complete contents of the `credentialSubject` will be consumed only after the wire-formats and signed-envelopes have been verified.

#### Signature Verification

The veracity and integrity of trust assertions are paramount to ensuring unbiased insights. 
All trust assertions SHOULD be cryptographically signed by the issuer using strong cryptographic methods and verified prior to consumption. 
The standard supports any strong signature methods, such as: ECDSA, EdDSA, Schnorr Signatures, RSA...

EIP-712 should be considered a complementary cryptographic proof method alongside others like ECDSA, EdDSA, Schnorr, and RSA for on-chain verifiable credentials. 
Its inclusion emphasizes the importance of user-friendly, secure, and efficient interactions with blockchain-based identity and credential systems.
It is noteworthy that EIP-712 mandates the presence of all fields, even if some are left empty in order to enable their verification.

> 

Reviewer: This example looks a little iffy? https://w3c-ccg.github.io/ethereum-eip712-signature-2021-spec/ makes it sound like there are some mandatory fields missing here?

### Using content identifier for assertions
[Content Identifiers][CID] enable anyone to deterministically generate identifiers based on the canonicalized content of a given JSON document, and store it in a compact, tamper-evident way conducive to merging, syncing, or even CRDT patterns.

### Agnostic data model
- Flexible data ranges leveraging floats type facilitating the creation of tailored user experiences,
- Data structures have been designed to be use-case agnostic, enabling the reusability of the data across different use-cases.

### Trust Modeling

1. Trust in an individual or entity is based on their qualities, or their abilities; it is not binary and evolves over time,
2. Distrust assertions allow for the capture of suspicious behaviors,

### Verification
The verification process is crucial to ensure the use of valid and up-to-date assertions, thus maintaining the trust system's reliability and accuracy. 
This step ensures the integrity and reliability of the assertions, which is essential for supporting trust and interoperability within the ecosystem.

> ## Test Cases

Reviewer: Mmm, these aren't test cases so much as possible use-cases.  It might be good to mark this section as non-normative explicitly, or leave it out of the CAIP itself and just add these in, say, the eth-magicians thread promoting the CAIP?

Reviewer: we use "test cases" more in the sense of "test vectors" -- I don't think you really need this section anyways since the examples provided throughout are pretty illustrative and seem (unless mircea and raphael missed any syntax nits) to be valid both as VCs and as examples of your data model?

By establishing a common language for peer trust assertions, this specification enables diverse ecosystems to interoperate with a shared understanding of trust, benefiting from each other and creating synergies that strengthen insights generated from webs of trust.

## Specification

This specification outlines methods for representing peer trust assertions, managing their lifecycle, and verifying their authenticity.
It provides as well guidelines for representing insights calculated from a web of trust.
The application of graph theory to utilize these webs of trust is beyond the scope of this proposal, but some examples are provided.

### Trust Representation

In the following diagram, we depict the process where an issuer of a long-lived and verifiable document formally asserts their trust in a subject, highlighting the foundational relationship within a peer-to-peer trust-based system.

![diagram1](https://github.com/dayksx/CAIPs/assets/77788154/e14b4bcb-afc2-4578-9e33-1c0c8bb927e2)

#### Identifier Scheme

> ##### Peers Identification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Peer Identification
```

Trust assertions are made about, and by, peers identifiable with identifiers derived from public keys or directly using a public key. This enables peers to sign assertions and be verified.

Identification of peers SHOULD make use of key pair-based mechanism to facilitate interoperability and verifiability.
- **[Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs)][DID]** with key pair-based methods for off-chain assertions.
  - **did:pkh (Public Key Hash):** This method is designed to be chain-agnostic, enabling the creation of DIDs based on public key hashes from a variety of blockchains. Its universality promotes interoperability and simplifies identity management across diverse ecosystems. This approach is particularly useful for applications that aim to operate across multiple cryptographically-secured networks (like blockchains) without being tied to any specific one.

>   - **did:key:** This method allows for the generation of DIDs directly from cryptographic public keys, supporting various key types such as ECDSA, EdDSA, Schnorr Signatures, and RSA. It is straightforward and self-contained, with no need for interaction with blockchain networks. This makes it fast and cost-effective for scenarios that do not require decentralized verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **did:key:** This method allows for the generation of DIDs directly from cryptographic public keys, supporting various key types such as ECDSA, EdDSA, Schnorr Signatures, and RSA. It is straightforward and self-contained, with no need for interaction with blockchain networks. This makes it fast and cost-effective for scenarios that do not require on-chain verification or cross-chain use-cases using keytypes not available in the target verifier's toolchain.
```

UCANs use `did:key`s for decentralized verification! The question of whether or not verification is decentralized is orthogonal to how the key is expressed; best to get more precise about who needs to use which did expression where, whether my suggestion works or not.

- **On-chain Public Accounts** using the chain-specific address type for smart contract-based assertions (e.g., `address` type in EVM-based chains) 

##### Assertions Identification

Assertions themselves need to be identifiable for referencing or updating purposes. 

> They SHOULD be identified by a immutable identifier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They SHOULD be identified by an immutable identifier.
```

> - **[Content Identifiers (CID)][CID]**, which is self-describing and facilitates their unique identification and retrieval. If a CID is used, the CID SHOULD be envelopped as a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) to offer a contextual identifier, such as IPFS (ipfs://).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Content Identifiers (CID)][CID]**, which is self-describing and facilitates their unique identification and retrieval. If a CID is used, the CID SHOULD be expressed as a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) to offer a contextual identifier, such as the IPFS scheme if using an IPFS CID (`ipfs://`).
```

>   - This is not necessarily embedded as a property within the document itself; it derives from the content of the document and can be calculated (or recalculated, as a checksum of its contents) by anyone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - This is not necessarily embedded as a property within the document itself; it derives from the content of the document and can be calculated (or recalculated, as a checksum of its contents) by anyone with the document and the checksum algorithm used to create it (e.g. the default canonicalization and encoding of IPFS `kubo`).
```

  - This is generated by hashing the content with a cryptographic hash function; This hash, along with metadata about the hash function, is then encoded in the [multihash][] format.
- **On-chain custom identifiers** generated and assigned by a smart contract based assertion storage, i.e. on-chain attestations identifiers (e.g., Verax, EAS). 

#### Data Model

Subsequent data structures are represented in accordance with the [Verifiable Credential Data Model](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/) and, in some cases, in raw format relevant for on-chain assertions. 

> Verifiable credentials can be used both off-chain and on-chain for better portability, while raw formats can be utilized in decentralized data storages (e.g., Ceramic Network) or on-chain assertion storages (e.g., Verax, EAS) as a new schema to issue assertions without the need for additional layers of verifiability and interoperability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verifiable credentials can be used both off-chain and on-chain for better portability, while raw formats can be utilized in decentralized data storage systems (e.g., Ceramic Network) or on-chain assertion systems (e.g., Verax, EAS) as a registered schema to issue assertions without the need for additional layers of verifiability and interoperability.
```

However, this standard does not prescribe any specific document type, though it recommends using internationally recognized standards or trusted attestation services."

![diagram2](https://github.com/dayksx/CAIPs/assets/77788154/479df06f-3dd5-4c88-b396-4cfae01ff8d6)

**Peer Trust Assertions:**

Modeling trust and distrust towards an individual or entity can be a complex task due to the subjective and multifaceted nature of trust.
This standard proposes the following conceptualization for the trust concept:

> - `scope`: This defines the applicable trust perimeter. It SHOULD be a noun. Any implementation or profile of this specification COULD enumerate or provide reference lists of valid "scope" values to facilitate interoperability across different systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `scope`: This defines the applicable trust perimeter. It SHOULD be a noun. Any implementation or profile of this specification SHOULD enumerate or provide reference lists of valid "scope" values to facilitate interoperability across different systems.
```
The IETF options are only SHOULD and MAY, not COULD; also, I feel strongly that it's a SHOULD here, not a MAY.

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119

- `level`: This defines the extent of trust. It MUST remain within the following range: [-1,1]. This could be translated as follows: 'Very low' (-1), 'Low' (-0.5), 'Neutral' (0), 'High' (0.5), 'Very High' (1);
- `reason` (optional): This defines the motivation of the trust. It MAY be based on some tagging system or other dictionary shared across producers and consumers to guarantee interoperability;

> **Assertion of trust to a peer:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Assertion of trust to a peer:**

```

```json
"@context": ["https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"],
"type": ["VerifiableCredential", "PeerTrustCredential"],
"issuanceDate": "2024-02-15T07:05:56.273Z",
"issuer": "did:pkh:eip155:1:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
"credentialSubject":
{
  "id": "did:pkh:eip155:1:0xfA045B2F2A25ad0B7365010eaf9AC2Dd9905895c",
  "trustworthiness":
  [
    {
      "scope": "Honesty",
      "level": 0.5,
      "reason": ["Alumnus"]
    },
    {
      "scope": "Software development",
      "level": 1,
      "reason": ["Software engineer", "Ethereum core developer"]
    },
    {
      "scope": "Software security",
      "level": 0.5,
      "reason": ["White Hat", "Smart Contract Auditor"]
    }
  ]
},
"credentialSchema": [{
  "id": "ipfs://QmcwYEnLysTyepjjtJw19oTDwuiopbCDbEcCuprCBiL7gl",
  "type": "JsonSchema"
},
"proof": {}
```

> *Raw  Format*

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Raw  Format**

```

    },
    {
      "scope": "Software security",
      "level": -0.5,
      "reason": ["Poor track record", "Lack of transparency"]
    },
    {
      "scope": "User experience design",
      "level": -0.5,
      "reason": ["Poor UX"]
    },
    {
      "scope": "Lawful",
      "level": -1,
      "reason": ["Money laundering", "Piracy", "Non-compliance"]
    }
  ]
},
"credentialSchema": [{
  "id": "ipfs://QmcwYEnLysTyepjjtJw19oTDwuiopbCDbEcCuprCBiL7gl",
  "type": "JsonSchema"
},
"proof": {}
```

*This example represents an assertion issued by the issuer identified as `did:pkh:eip155:1:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044`.
It expresses distrust towards the subject identified as `did:pkh:eip155:1:0xC3764761E297D6f121e79C32A65829Cd1dDb4D33` in areas such as honesty, software development, and software security to some extent.
The assertion provides reasons for each scope.*

#### Validity Period

Trust, being inherently dynamic, can be managed within the document by specifying a validity period, after which the credential must be renewed to maintain its validity.
A validity limitation can be introduced with the fields `validFrom` and `validUntil`.

```json

> "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"],
> "type": ["VerifiableCredential", "PeerTrustCredential"],
> "issuanceDate": "2024-02-15T07:05:56.273Z",
> "issuer": "did:pkh:eip155:1:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
> "validFrom": "2024-01-01T19:23:24Z",
> "validUntil": "2025-01-01T19:23:24Z",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
    "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"],
    "type": ["VerifiableCredential", "PeerTrustCredential"],
    "issuanceDate": "2024-02-15T07:05:56.273Z",
    "issuer": "did:pkh:eip155:1:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
    "validFrom": "2024-01-01T19:23:24Z",
    "validUntil": "2025-01-01T19:23:24Z"
}
```

```

> ##### On-chain assertions vaidity period

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### On-chain assertions validity period

```

> Most on-chain assertion storages manage expiration times natively without requiring changes to the overall schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many on-chain assertion storage systems manage expiration times natively without requiring changes to the overall schema.
```

I find this a little confusing-- are you saying `validFrom` and `validUntil` aren't needed if you use a storage mechanism that already garbage-collections the assertions and makes them 404 after expiration? I would word this different if so:

```suggestion
Many on-chain assertion storage systems manage expiration times natively, and in implementations relying exclusively on systems that do so, adding explicit validity data to each assertion may be redundant and unnecessary, unless its for forward-compatibility or interoperability with outside verifiers.
```

### Trust Management

Initially, issued trust assertions should be properly persisted to ensure their availability according to the use-case.

> Subsequently, as trust between peers evolves over time, this proposal outlines a method for managing the entire lifecycle of these assertions, encompassing their creation, update, and eventual revocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subsequently, as trust between peers evolves over time, this proposal outlines a method for managing the entire lifecycle of these assertions, encompassing their creation, update, and eventual revocation.
```
why is revocation eventual? would `potential` or `optional` be more precise?

> Subsequently, as trust between peers evolves over time, this proposal outlines a method for managing the entire lifecycle of these assertions, encompassing their creation, update, and eventual revocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subsequently, as trust between peers evolves over time, this proposal outlines a method for managing the entire lifecycle of these assertions, encompassing their creation, update, and optional revocation.
```

Reviewer: eventual would mean it happens to every record here, which is not the case and could lead readers to confuse (non-guaranteed!) expiry with manual/intentional early revocation...

#### Trust Persistance

Trust Assertions issued by peers compose into a verifiable trust graph that can be consumed for trustless reputation-based use cases.

> To fulfill its purpose, these assertions SHOULD be persisted using mechanisms that provide these properties relative to the given use-case requirements such as Security, Data integrity, Data ownership, Interoperabiltiy, Composability, Scalability, Censorship resistance, Sustainability...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To fulfill its purpose, these assertions SHOULD be persisted using mechanisms that provide these properties without compromising the given use-case's other technical requirements, such as security, data integrity, data ownership, defined interoperability, composability, scalability, censorship-resistance, sustainability, etc.
```

#### Trust Update

When an issuer needs to update a trust assertion, they simply generate a new assertion containing the revised information.
This new assertion, when issued, MUST supersede any previous assertions of the same type, issued by the same entity, and pertaining to the same subject.

> The new assertion COULD refer to the overwritten assertion by adding its identifier in the top level of the data structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new assertion COULD refer to the overwritten assertion by adding its identifier as value for the `previousVersion` key at the top level of the assertion's data structure:

```

```json

>     ""previousVersion":": "ipfs://QmcwYEnWysTyepjjtJw19oTDwuiopbCDbEcCuprCBiL7gt",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
    ...
    "previousVersion": "ipfs://QmcwYEnWysTyepjjtJw19oTDwuiopbCDbEcCuprCBiL7gt",
    ...
}
```
lol looks like your JSON got wierdly escaped here

```

#### Trust Revocation

> When an issuer decides to revoke a previously issued trust assertion without replacing it, they should generate a new assertion that includes a `credentialStatus` attribute, with a `statusPurpose` set to `revocation`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an issuer decides to revoke a previously issued trust assertion without replacing it, they should generate a new assertion that includes a `credentialStatus` object whose `id` key contains the identifier for the revoked assertion, and whose `statusPurpose` key set to the literal `revocation`.
```

> This new assertion should explicitly reference the assertion being revoked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new assertion should explicitly reference the assertion being revoked using the `credentialStatus.id` mechanism ONLY, and not the `previousVersion` used for update assertions.
```

By doing so, the system and its participants can easily identify the revocation status of any assertion, ensuring the trust graph remains accurate and up-to-date with the current trust relationships.

**Revocation of trust assertion:**

```json
"@context": ["https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"],
"type": ["VerifiableCredential", "PeerTrustCredential"],
"issuanceDate": "2024-02-29T14:31:56.273Z",
"issuer": "did:pkh:eip155:1:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
"credentialStatus": {
    "id": "ipfs://QmcwYEnWysTyepjjtJw19oTDwuiopbCDbEcCuprCBiL7gt",
    "type": "CredentialStatus",
    "statusPurpose": "revocation",
},
```

> ##### On-chain assertions revocation

Reviewer: ```suggestion

##### On-chain assertions revocation
```

sorry i've become obsessive about linting markdown lately because it sometimes displays wrong in jekyll if you don't have the newlines just right

> Most on-chain assertion storages manage revocation natively without requiring changes to the overall schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many on-chain assertion storage systems manage revocation natively (i.e. as deletions of the original assertion) and thus explicit revocation may be redundant unless forward-compatibility or interoperability with other corpuses are targeted.
```

#### Trust Graph Expansion

##### Implicit Trust Assertions

> While the Peer Trust Assertion model outlined previously focuses on explicit trust signals, the trust graph can be further enriched with additional implicit on-chain and/or off-chain trust signals related to its peers. These can include Proof of Humanity, Proof of Membership, Proof of Contributions, Proof of Attendance, Social Graphs, among others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the Peer Trust Assertion model outlined previously focuses on explicit trust signals, the trust graph can be further enriched with additional implicit on-chain and/or off-chain trust signals related to its peers. These can include proof of humanity, proof of membership, proof of contribution, proof of attendance, or other forms of open-data query, including social-graph checks.
```

The veracity and integrity of trust assertions are paramount to ensuring unbiased insights.
All trust assertions SHOULD be cryptographically signed by the issuer using strong cryptographic methods and verified prior to consumption.
The specification supports any strong signature methods, such as: ECDSA, EdDSA, Schnorr Signatures, RSA, etc.

[EIP-712][] is recommended to implementers as a complementary cryptographic proof method alongside others like ECDSA, EdDSA, Schnorr, and RSA for on-chain verifiable credentials.
Its inclusion emphasizes the importance of user-friendly, secure, and efficient interactions with blockchain-based identity and credential systems.
It is noteworthy that [EIP-712][] mandates the presence of all fields, even if some are left empty in order to enable their verification.
Note that composing [EIP712][] with [W3C Verifiable Credentials][VC] requires the [EthereumEip712Signature2021][] signature suite.

##### Example EIP-712 proof object for use in a W3C Verifiable Credential

```json
  "proof": {
      "verificationMethod": "did:pkh:eip155:59144:0x3892967AA898d7EeBf1B08d3E1F31B2F4C84317A#blockchainAccountId",
      "created": "2024-01-27T07:05:56.273Z",

>       "proofPurpose": "assertionMethod",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "proofPurpose": "assertionMethod",
      "proofValue": "0x...",
```

      "type": "EthereumEip712Signature2021"
  }
```

> ##### On-chain assertions verification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### On-chain assertion verification

```

> On-chain the verification is automaticaly done by the trusted protocol, but can be verified according to the protocol specificities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When computed "on-chain" (i.e. in a node runtime), the verification logic is automaticaly handled by core transaction logic, but can also be verified independently by mirroring this logic elsewhere or after the fact from on-chain records.
```
I'm not sure if this was exactly what you meant, but if not, please be more explicit about whatever that was, it's cryptic in its current form :D

Author: That's correct. I just wanted to say that trusting the blockchain implementation and immutability make the computation trustless without the need of verification at each compute

#### Format Verification

Assertions MUST adhere to the predefined schema to be deemed valid.

> For example, in the context of a [W3C Verifiable Credential][VC], the document MUST include a 'credentialSchema' as a top-level property, with a value that dereferences to a schema known to the verifier and to which the document conforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in the context of a [W3C Verifiable Credential][VC], the document MUST include an array of 'credentialSchema' objects as a top-level property, one or more of which contains a value that dereferences to a schema known to the verifier, and to which the document conforms.

```

Such a property provides verifiers with the necessary information to assess whether the data presented conforms to the established schema(s).

```json

> "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"],
>   "credentialSchema": [{
>     "id": "ipfs://QmcwYEnLysTyepjjtJw19oTDwuiopbCDbEcCuprCBiL7gl",
>     "type": "JsonSchema"
>   },

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
    "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"],
    "credentialSchema": [{
        "id": "ipfs://QmcwYEnLysTyepjjtJw19oTDwuiopbCDbEcCuprCBiL7gl",
        "type": "JsonSchema"
    }],
    ...
}
```

```

For resiliency the schema COULD be stored redundantly in a decentralized protocol such as IPFS.

#### Validity Verification

Prior to their consumption, assertions MUST undergo a thorough validation process to ascertain their current validity.
This process includes several critical checks:
- Determining whether an assertion has been superseded by a more recent one,
- Verifying if the assertion has been formally revoked, and
- Confirming that the assertion is within its designated validity period and has not expired.

### Trust Assertions Consumption

After the verification process, the consumer can utilize the trust graph for generating insights relevant to their specific use-case.

#### Processing

> The consumption of the trust graph typically involves recursive calculations across the graph, following specific rules, to derive peers insights such as reputation scores.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The consumption of the trust graph typically involves recursive calculations across the graph, following specific rules, to derive peer insights such as reputation scores.

```

This process can utilize various existing or newly developed algorithms tailored to the unique requirements of the use-case.
This specification remains unopiniated regarding this processing.

> However, this specification offers some guidelines to ensure integrity and transparency in the processing of the trust graph information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this specification offers some guidelines to ensure integrity and transparency in the processing of the trust graph information:

```

- Trust assertions COULD be disregarded or given less weight according to clear rules (for example, a minimum of activity per asserter, the ownership of an asset, or if assertions contain offtopic or unparseable information)

#### Reputation Score

In addition to detailing the structure of incoming assertions, this specification also outlines the generation of outgoing assertions, which correspond to the issuance of peer trust scores calculated leveraging the trust graph.

- `trustScoreScope`: This defines the used trust perimeter(s) to calculate the trust score;
- `trustValue`: Calculated score;
- `trustResult`: Interpretation calculated by the trust computer; It MUST remain within the following range: [-1,1]. This could be translated as follows: 'Highly distrusted' (-1), 'Distrusted' (-0.5), 'Neutral' (0), 'Trusted' (0.5), 'Higly Trusted' (1);
- `trustScoreType`: Algorithm used to process the trust score;

This structure can be enriched according to the category or context of the trust score.

##### Peer Trust Score

```json

> "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"],
> "type": ["VerifiableCredential", "PeerTrustScorCredential"],
> "issuanceDate": "2023-11-24T12:24:42Z",
> "issuer": "did:pkh:eip155:1:0x23d86aa31d4198a78baa98e49bb2da52cd15c6f0",
> "credentialSubject":
> {
>   "id": "did:pkh:eth:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
>   "trustScore": {
>     "trustScoreScope": ["SoftwareDevelopment"],
>     "trustValue": 0.19191918793049725,
>     "trustResult": 0.7,
>     "creationAt": "2024-02-27T10:28:00.000Z",
>     "trustScoreType": "EigenTrust"
>   },
>   
> },
> "proof": {}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"],
  "type": ["VerifiableCredential", "PeerTrustScorCredential"],
  "issuanceDate": "2023-11-24T12:24:42Z",
  "issuer": "did:pkh:eip155:1:0x23d86aa31d4198a78baa98e49bb2da52cd15c6f0",
  "credentialSubject":
  {
    "id": "did:pkh:eth:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
    "trustScore": {
      "trustScoreScope": ["SoftwareDevelopment"],
      "trustValue": 0.19191918793049725,
      "trustResult": 0.7,
      "creationAt": "2024-02-27T10:28:00.000Z",
      "trustScoreType": "EigenTrust"
    }
  },
  proof: {
    ...
  }
```

```

> *Raw Format*

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Raw Format**

```

```json
"trustScoreScope": ["SoftwareDevelopment"],
"trustValue": 0.19191918793049725,
"trustResult": 0.7,
"creationAt": "2024-02-27T10:28:00.000Z",
"trustScoreType": "EigenTrust"
```

*The above example represents an assertion issued by the issuer `did:pkh:eip155:1:0x23d86aa31d4198a78baa98e49bb2da52cd15c6f0`.

> It claims a certain level of trust to the subject `did:pkh:eip155:1:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044` in the area of software development calculated with the EigenTrust algorithm.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It claims a certain level of trustworthiness for the subject `did:pkh:eip155:1:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044` in the area of software development calculated with the EigenTrust algorithm.*
```

### Using IPFS Content Identifier for assertions

[Content Identifiers][CID] enable anyone to deterministically generate identifiers based on the canonicalized content of a given JSON document, and store it in a compact, tamper-evident way conducive to merging, syncing, or even CRDT patterns.

### Agnostic data model

Flexible data ranges leveraging float types facilitates the creation of tailored user experiences.

Data structures have been designed to be use-case agnostic, enabling the reusability of the data across different use-cases.

### Trust Modeling

Trust in an individual or entity is based on their qualities, or their abilities; it is not binary and evolves over time.

Distrust assertions allow for the capture of suspicious behaviors or subjective impressions.

### Verification

The verification process is crucial to ensure the use of valid and up-to-date assertions, thus maintaining the trust system's reliability and accuracy.
This step ensures the integrity and reliability of the assertions, which is essential for supporting trust and interoperability within the ecosystem.

> ## Test Cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use Cases

*This section is non-normative.*
```

1. claims made by actors in an open, peer-to-peer network about discreet resources (software components in all the examples that follow),
2. claims made by these actors about each other,
3. community-derived trust scores for the discreet resources and/or actors.

These three data elements can be used independently of one another.
For building a community-powered trust assessment mechanism, it's necessary to identify and gather the relevant data in accordance with the requirements of the intended trust scores computation.
These data can then be leveraged to compute synthetic trust scores which reflect the overall sentiment of the community.

The data framework modeled below incorporates the following basic primitives as inputs:

- **Trust List:** This allows individuals to define their trusted peers, shaping their trust graph;
- **Expert Report:** This enables experts to publish insights and conclusions about a given resource (e.g. an audit in the case of software components);
- **Peer Review:** This allows individuals to endorse or dispute claims made about resources by peers;

> - **Trust Score:** This enables any trust computer to publish computed trust scores about resources and/or about the actors behind the other 3 primitives.

Reviewer 2: Might be useful to define "trust computer"?

Reviewer: YES PLEASE (basically the only change needed before I can approve and merge this)

```json
"id": "ipfs://QmPTqvH3vm6qcZSGqAUsq78MQa9Ctb56afRZg1WJ5sKLiu",
"type": ["VerifiableCredential", "SecurityReportCredential"],
"issuanceDate": "2024-02-15T07:05:56.273Z",
"issuer": "did:pkh:eth:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
"credentialSubject":
{
  "id": "snap://CLwZocaUEbDErtQAsybaudZDJq65a8AwlEFgkGUpmAQ=",
  "securityStatus": "Unsecured",
  "securityFindings": [
    {
      "criticality": 1,
      "type": "Key leak",
      "description": "`snap_getBip44Entropy` makes the parent key accessible"
      "lang": "en"
    },
    {
      "criticality": 0.5,
      "type": "Buffer Overflow"
    },
    {
      "criticality": 0.25,
      "type": "Phishing"
    },
    {
      "criticality": 0,
      "type": "Data leak",
      "description": "API can communicate data to a centralized server"
    },
  ]
},
"proof": {}
```

Security report with no findings:

```json
"type": ["VerifiableCredential", "SecurityReportCredential"],
"issuanceDate": "2024-02-15T07:05:56.273Z",
"issuer": "did:pkh:eth:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
"credentialSubject":
{
  "id": "snap://CLwZocaUEbDErtQAsybaudZDJq65a8AwlEFgkGUpmAQ=",
  "securityStatus": "Secured"
},
"proof": {}
```

> - The `securityStatus` is the final result of the security assessment, that can be either `Secured` or `Unsecured`.

Reviewer 2: Should this be optional? Because I'm wondering if it isn't too reductive. With most software applications we use we accept to take on some level of risk, but it's not black or white. 
The smart contract audits that I've seen have findings with different levels of criticality, but I guess auditors don't want to be forced to draw the line somewhere to declare that a piece of software is `Secured` or `Unsecured` when the reality is more nuanced than that.

Reviewer: maybe auditors would be more comfortable with a boolean like `audited`, and even then they'd probably want it applied only to a specific binary 😅

###### Expert Report Types

Review of a Security Report:

Reviews are used to express an opinion on any subject, such as a security report.

```json
"type": ["VerifiableCredential", "ReviewCredential"],
"issuanceDate": "2024-02-15T07:05:56.273Z",
"issuer": "did:pkh:eth:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
"credentialSubject":
{
  "id": "ipfs://QmPTqvH3vm6qcZSGqAUsq78MQa9Ctb56afRZg1WJ5sKLiu",
  "currentStatus": "Disputed",
  "reason": ["Missed Vulnerability"],
},
"proof": {}
```

```json
"type": ["VerifiableCredential", "ReviewCredential"],
"issuer": "did:pkh:eth:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
"credentialSubject":
{
  "id": "ipfs://d6f7052b6f28912f2703066a912ea577f2ce4da4caa5a5fbd8a57286c345c2f2",
  "currentStatus": "Endorsed"
},
"proof": {}
```

Review of a Software Component:

Reviews can also be used directly on a software component to provide a non technical review.

```json
"type": ["VerifiableCredential", "ReviewCredential"],
"issuanceDate": "2024-02-15T07:05:56.273Z",
"issuer": "did:pkh:eth:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
"credentialSubject":
{
  "id": "snap://CLwZocaUEbDErtQAsybaudZDJq65a8AwlEFgkGUpmAQ=",
  "currentStatus": "Disputed",

>   "reason": ["Scam", "Phishing"]

Reviewer 2: What if someone wants to provide a longer explanation for the reason? To hack my way around that personally I would post the explanation on hackmd for example and put the link as one of the items in this array  😄

Author: The primary purpose of this credential is to facilitate quick reactions to another assertion or any discrete resource, akin to the thumb up/thumb down, upvote/downvote, or emojis used in social networks. Given this context, perhaps renaming the credential to "ReactionCredential" would more accurately reflect its intended use, as opposed to "ReviewCredential".

For more detailed analyses, we would utilize the "Expert Report" credential. This format is designed to comprehensively address issues, including descriptions and references to external resources. Considering your feedback, it might be appropriate to consider names like "ReportCredential" or retain "ReviewCredential" for this purpose.

Please note, this data element has been removed from CAIP-261 and will be included in the forthcoming [CAIP-x](https://github.com/dayksx/CAIPs/blob/community-powered-trust-assessment/CAIPs/caip-x.md).

Author: Here is what this modeling would look like.

![diagram](https://github.com/ChainAgnostic/CAIPs/assets/77788154/84ff5f29-30b4-463a-a209-71ad08f8ea66)

**Report Assertion**

*A report presents a detailed presentation of factual information and objective analysis.*
```json
"type": ["VerifiableCredential", "ReportCredential"],
"issuanceDate": "2024-02-15T07:05:56.273Z",
"issuer": "did:pkh:eth:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
"credentialSubject":
{
  "id": "ipfs://QmPTqvH3vm6qcZSGqAUsq78MQa9Ctb56afRZg1WJ5sKLiu",
  "type": "Security",
  "result": -1,
  "issues": [
    {
      "criticality": 1,
      "type": "Key leak",
      "description": "`snap_getBip44Entropy` makes the parent key accessible",
      "uri": "https://hackmd.io/@ra-phael/DummySnap5KeyLeak"
    },
    {
      "criticality": 0.5,
      "type": "Buffer Overflow"
      "uri": "https://hackmd.io/@ra-phael/DummySnap5BufferOverflow"
    },
    {
      "criticality": 0.25,
      "type": "Phishing"
      "uri": "ipfs://QmElreH3vm6qcASGqAUsq78MQa9Ctb56afRZg1WJ5sKLpl"
    },
    {
      "criticality": 0,
      "type": "Data leak",
      "description": "API can communicate data to a centralized server"
    },
  ]
},
"proof": {}
```
*Note that the Report Assertion could pertain to matters beyond 'Security,' including 'User Experience,' 'Compliance,' and 'Performance' reports, among others.*

**Reaction Assertion**

*A reaction represents a quantifiable expression of agreement or disagreement with the report's content, typically reflecting the collective sentiment of the community.*
```json
"type": ["VerifiableCredential", "ReactionCredential"],
"issuanceDate": "2024-02-15T07:05:56.273Z",
"issuer": "did:pkh:eth:0x44dc4E3309B80eF7aBf41C7D0a68F0337a88F044",
"credentialSubject":
{
  "id": "ipfs://QmPTqvH3vm6qcZSGqAUsq78MQa9Ctb56afRZg1WJ5sKLiu",
  "reaction": "Endorsed",
  "reason": ["Provide important context", "Vulnerabilities clearly defined"],
},
"proof": {}
```
The example above illustrates a reaction to a Report, but it can also apply to a reaction towards a discrete resource, such as a software component.

@ra-phael @bumblefudge @Vid201 @mirceanis @dbcfd Wdyt about this representation?

Reviewer: i like these representations!  my only bikeshedding would be to suggest new property names:
* `type` is too easy to confuse with VC, filesystem, programming language, and other uses of the term; i'd use something that makes more explicit that it's an issue type, like `issueType`, `issueClass`, `tag`, `category`, etc.
* `uri` is a type (or a "domain" in some old-school contexts), i.e. a constraint on the structure of the string that the value of that property can be-- since the *function* of this particular URI is to anchor semantics or disambiguate/explain/enrich the `issueType` preceding it, maybe a more explicit name would be `typeDefinition` or `classDefinition` etc, or `tagContext` or `definition`, etc?

Reviewer: ^ Not blocking changes to merge but highly recommended before this goes FINAL :D

By establishing a common language for peer trust assertions, this specification enables diverse ecosystems to interoperate with a shared understanding of trust, benefiting from each other and creating synergies that strengthen insights generated from webs of trust.

## Specification

This specification outlines methods for representing peer trust assertions, managing their lifecycle, and verifying their authenticity.
It provides as well guidelines for representing insights calculated from a web of trust.
The application of graph theory to utilize these webs of trust is beyond the scope of this proposal, but some examples are provided.

### Trust Representation

In the following diagram, we depict the process where an issuer of a long-lived and verifiable document formally asserts their trust in a subject, highlighting the foundational relationship within a peer-to-peer trust-based system.

![diagram1](https://github.com/dayksx/CAIPs/assets/77788154/e14b4bcb-afc2-4578-9e33-1c0c8bb927e2)

#### Identifier Scheme

##### Peers Identification

> Trust assertions are made about, and by, peers identifiable with identifiers derived from public keys or directly using a public key. This enables peers to sign assertions and be verified.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Trust assertions are made about, and by, peers identifiable with identifiers derived from public keys or directly using a public key. This enables peers to sign and verify assertions.

```

  - **did:pkh (Public Key Hash):** This method is designed to be chain-agnostic, enabling the creation of DIDs based on public key hashes from a variety of blockchains. Its universality promotes interoperability and simplifies identity management across diverse ecosystems. This approach is particularly useful for applications that aim to operate across multiple cryptographically-secured networks (like blockchains) without being tied to any specific one.
  - **did:key:** This method allows for the generation of DIDs directly from cryptographic public keys, supporting various key types such as ECDSA, EdDSA, Schnorr Signatures, and RSA. It is straightforward and self-contained, with no need for interaction with blockchain networks. This makes it fast and cost-effective for scenarios that do not require decentralized verification.
- **On-chain Public Accounts** using the chain-specific address type for smart contract-based assertions (e.g., `address` type in EVM-based chains) 

##### Assertions Identification

Assertions themselves need to be identifiable for referencing or updating purposes. 
They SHOULD be identified by a immutable identifier.

> - **[Content Identifiers (CID)][CID]**, which is self-describing and facilitates their unique identification and retrieval. If a CID is used, the CID SHOULD be expressed as a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) to offer a contextual identifier, such as the IPFS scheme if using an IPFS CID (`ipfs://`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **[Content Identifiers (CID)][CID]**, which are self-describing and facilitates their unique identification and retrieval. If a CID is used, the CID SHOULD be expressed as a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) to offer a contextual identifier, such as the IPFS scheme if using an IPFS CID (`ipfs://`).

```
